## Week 2: Is the AI reading the data or is it using "muscle memory"
##### 1. Counting Data:
- From the 175 elk, there are a total 1,585,486 entries ([[2001-2020 - Notes and Ideas]]). Of these elk, only 113 are relevant to the study due to the necessity of covering the winter and summer ranges of the data. Therefore, there are a total 234 elk years (an elk that is only tracked for 90 days of a year for example would still be considered as contributing 1 elk year) in the study.
- The choice of only elk whose collars lasted the full ranges could inflate the resident majority in the data if the migrants were more likely to not last this full range. It is not likely that this will vary the result though as the test is to simply see if the AI is reading the data, not to produce a complete theory of elk migration.
##### 2. Foundations from the Data:
- We then need a baseline from the data. This weeks attempt is to prove that the AI can spot 'trends' in the data without just regurgitating what it already knows. First, we apply the 'human' element of the study by seeing what we can infer from the data. This will provide a useful baseline to the AI's response (see [[Workflow Notes]]). To do this, we can plot the data into 3 useful graphs each giving some concept of what story the data is telling. The code for these graphs can be found in [[Code Appendix]]. 
- These graphs (found here: [[Movement Graphs.png]]) tell a revealing story. Elk migration in the Ya Ha Tinda herd is actually divisible into multiple groups. The left most graph shows that most of the elk actually stay resident throughout the year (the thick blue mess at the bottom of the graph), but some travel, and to different distances at that.
- The middle most graph shows a histogram of the summer distances from the winter ranges. It is the most important graph to test the AI on this data as it clearly shows distinct groups of elk travelling to separate distances. From my count, there exists roughly 4 or 5 of these groups. There is not one continuum for the migration. This will provide the distinction between an AI using the data and one using muscle memory. 
  - To ensure this was actually correct (as an arbitrary separation of 2.5km could easily infer false results), this test was repeated for separations of 1km and 5km and the results (here: [[bin_width_check.png]]) still stand that a gap exists between ~10-13km. This is substantial evidence of structure and not random 'noise' in the data. 
- The right most graph is mainly used as supporting evidence for the middle histogram. It shows summer distance against maximum distance travelled to outline summer migration is what is happening and this is not just the elk travelling at different times of the year. Points on the diagonal show that summer distance was the furthest distance the elk travelled in the year. 
  - There is a slight amount of anomalous data at the far left of the graph. This shows one of three possible metrics. 1) The elk actually did migrate but earlier or later than that of other elk in the data. This would mean the elk didn't migrate in July or August, but might have migrated in other months of the year. 2) The elk made a long excursion unrelated to its migration. 3) Maximum displacement is far more sensitive to a poor GPS fix than summer displacement is. We can test this.
##### 2.1. Testing GPS Fixes:
- We can start to test the GPS fixes by running a small script to check maximum displacement against summer distance and print the worst six of these. This script can be found at [[Code Appendix]] underneath the original script.
- We can then add a one liner to the original code (in: [[Code Appendix]]) to print out the movement data for the elk instead of cleaning it.
- Finally, we use the results from both to plot the trajectories of the six elk and can tell what the issue is with relative simplicity. The code is again in the [[Code Appendix]] while the plots can be found at [[suspect_tracks.png]]. 
- Our results clearly show that five of the six elk had a poor GPS fix while one of the elk migrated in June, one month earlier than that of the summer range we defined.

