### 1. Test Run:
- Learning to use an LLM to assess data and produce a result is an important first step. This should be a very trivial task such as plotting a bar chart for how many days in a year had temperatures over 20 degrees and then providing a hypothesis from the result. For this study I used the first 150 entries of elk ID 4049 from Hebblewhite's Ya Ha Tinda research on elk 2001-2005 ([[2001-2005 - Notes and Ideas]]). I asked Gemini 2.5 flash to provide a hypothesis of the animals movement two separate ways. In one test it was given only the image trajectories and step length/speed ([[trajectory.png]]), while in the other it was fed the raw data. Both were fed the same prompt - bar a small change to help each process the different types of input given to them ([[Gemini initial prompts]]). This was a 2 week range of data so as not to complicate the test.
  - From this, estimating the reliability and usefulness of the result was then the next step. Compare the AI's response to your own hypothesis of the data is important to assess the initial validity of the AI's reasoning. Understanding why it might've provided specific answers for each section takes a bit of logical reasoning but due to the triviality of the question this should not prove to be difficult.
  - A key takeaway from this initial test is the difference in logic provided by the AI dependent on its input. I found that during my test the text response provided a much stronger answer but was outpaced by the image response in its 'friendliness' to a human reader. It is also worth noting that neither answer was particularly explanatory due to the nature of the input data ([[Gemini Initial Responses]]).
### 2. Finding a hypothesis:
- A base understanding of the study is important for this stage of the project. Knowing how an animal might behave makes searching the literature for a suitable hypothesis easier. 
- Finding a suitable hypothesis is not easy work either - it must fit an arbitrary narrative to avoid bias. For example, trying to replicate the hypothesis 'British red squirrels spin around 30 times a day" is not suitable as the AI would not be able to easily spot a distinction like this without some sort of bias to lead it down the right path. 
  - A much better example of a suitable hypothesis could be something along the lines of 'Why do Canadian elk migrate during specific periods of the year'. This is stronger as it is a piece of data the AI could likely hypothesis from a larger data set without the intrinsic use of a bias to guide it.
  - My study focused on Hebblewhite's work in 2007 ([[Hebblewhite2007YaHaElkMigration.pdf]]) and aimed to reproduce a few out of eight of his hypotheses on why the migration of Canadian elk is decreasing. 
### 3. Familiarising with the AI:
- Influencing the AI occurs through a process known as context engineering. Alike the chaotic nature of the weather or a flowing stream, minutely small changes to the prompt can change the output entirely. It is therefore of upmost importance to learn how to 'correctly' prompt the AI without introducing bias into the system, and to learn how to recognise when bias is a factor.
  - Tools do exist to help with this. Google's AI Studio can be used to control the 'temperature' of an output - namely how similar or dissimilar an output is from the previous. For the majority of this study we will use a low temperature to ensure our results don't vary heavily from the path we are testing. We can also use other AI models to assess the validity of our prompting and whether we are or are not introducing any bias. Of course at the end of the day it comes down to intuition between myself and the two supervisors of the project to decide to what extent bias has been introduced into the system.
- Another way of getting familiar with AI is by learning how different models react in different ways. As aforementioned, in the original test we used Google's Flash 2.5 model. However, Google actually offers a more advanced Pro 3.1 model which searches beyond the surface and gives more intricate, deeper answers. Other companies also offer their own LLM's. For example in my research and day-to-day use I've found that Anthropic's Claude actually gives more advanced answers to similar prompts, but that the nature of these answers tends to be less accessible for a typical person. 
  - One key part of this study will be weighing the strengths and weaknesses of each chosen model. Does a friendly but less intricate answer work better for this study than that of a less friendly but more advanced answer? 
- For this study, a final way of getting used to how AI operates is by studying how each data effects an output. The way we measured this was by feeding the original test 100 times the amount of data entries as before. The result was [[Gemini 2nd Results]] emerging from [[public/attachments/trajectory-2.png]]. This was a far stronger result in terms of the hypotheses that the AI generated more closely resembling that of the elk, however, it still lacked the same level of explanation that the original did. 
  - Further into the study, instead of feeding the AI more of the same data, we will be providing data on other topics (i.e fires, predators, etc... (see [[notes-on-hebblewhite-2006-paper---and-continuation-of-project-research-objective-og-image.webp]])) to attempt to influence a stronger explanation of the decreasing migration. This would of course also include false data to attempt to differentiate the AI's useful results from results where it is simply inferring from everything given to it.
### 4. Building a model:
- This section is about using everything from the previous sections to build a model. To do this we first require data about the chosen hypotheses. Start broad. For this we used data on the location of 175 elk over the period of 2001-2020. As the study continues more information can be introduced. These data will be more intrinsic to the overall picture. They'll each cover some small part of the hypotheses and only together will they give the full picture. 
  - It is again important to state that the AI should be provided with both real data supporting the study AND data useless to the study. Some of this useless data can still be real (i.e we used data on Pika in the area) while some of it can be synthetic (this can be done using an AI or otherwise). 
- Then, choosing what LLM's to test is also important. There are thousands of bots that now exist so refining a search is important. We use Gemini Flash 2.5, Gemini Pro 3.1, Claude Sonnet 5 and Claude Opus 4.8. These gives a range of examples from less advanced to more advanced models and covers a range of different outputs. 
- It is then important to break down the data. Calculate tests to be given to all of the models ranging from least input to most input. For the Gemini models this could also include varying the temperature. 
  - This step involves how much data the AI gets and how much prompting is done. The goal of this study is to avoid bias so testing how far this can be taken without the introduction of bias is an important step to keep in mind.