[[content/attachments/Hebblewhite2007YaHaElkMigration.pdf]]
NOTES:
- Initial area of interest is the May-June and September-December migration and move back.
  - Secondary focus would be 25-50km range of migration.
  - These would be conducted from the 2001-2005 set ([[2001-2005 - Notes and Ideas]]).
- A continuation of the paper would then be using the 2001-2020 data ([[2001-2020 - Notes and Ideas]]) to see if the measurable decrease in migration can be shown across this period.
- Feeding the AI multiple data on some of the eight hypotheses that are laid out + several 'useless' bit of data still pertaining to the YHT range would follow logically to see if the AI can actually re-discover Hebblewhite's hypotheses without bias influencing the decision.
  - This could prove to be the hardest part of the project due to the lack of available data and the easily introduced bias of choice. In an ideal world the AI would be fed hundreds of sets of data with only a few 'correct' choices to avoid bias, but that is not possible for this study.
  - Another issue with this is if the AI actually produces a new hypothesis not in the literature that is difficult to prove correct or incorrect.
  - The AI would most likely - at this point alone - have to be told that it were dealing with Canadian elk in the YHT range to help it distinguish between useful and un-useful data for its explanation of the migration. 
REAL DATA USEFUL FOR EACH HYPOTHESIS:
- Predator data for the region - i.e Wolf, Bear, Coyote, etc...
- Fire data for the region
- Elk Harvest Data
DISTRACTION DATA IDEAS:
*  Real data unrelated to the migration - i.e Pika data, geographical data such as rock types, etc...
* Synthetic data artificially generated by a secondary AI (most likely Claude Opus 4.8 or Fable 5.0). 